all right here we go hello Shannon
what's happening I'm doing well
how are you being here appreciate it
this is an incredible opportunity I'm
glad you you're interested in the
subject of American Indian history and
I'm glad to be here to talk about it
yeah I'm glad you were willing to come
here yeah I became fascinated when I
well I've always been sort of
peripherally interested but never really
delved into it until I read empire of
the summer moon and then you know have
you read that SG Queens book about the
Comanches and about the Texas Rangers
and it's such a crazy story that I just
became obsessed and then I read son of
the morning star and then I read Black
Elk the black alcohol was particularly
fascinating to me because it details
life before like before they killed
Custer to living on reservations to the
desperation I watch it before we get
started tell people what you are who you
are what you do so my name is Shannon
o'loughlin I'm citizen of the Choctaw
Nation of Oklahoma I've been a
practicing attorney since about 2001 and
I'm currently the executive director and
attorney for the Association on American
Indian Affairs we're the oldest
nonprofit serving Indian country we've
been around since 1922 alright and we
should tell people if you ever listen to
this in the future this is all going on
right now when the United States is
going through one of the craziest times
ever in terms of dealing with a virus
mm-hmm we're we're all sort of on
lockdown all gyms are closed all comedy
shows are closed all concerts are closed
clubs bars everything's closed and some
places are restricting travel and it it
it's it's interesting to me that this is
all going on and we've never had to
experience this before but it makes me
think of what happens when what happened
when the Europeans first came to North
America and encountered the Native
Americans and they didn't have any
immunity to all these disease
is that the Europeans are bringing over
and in some cases wiped out as much as
90% of the people that were living here
mm-hmm but we're still here yeah we
would have only shut the border is about
550 years ago we would yeah if you had a
Trump Trump Indian back then wanted to
build walls around everywhere not get
there yeah what's on it it is me really
it's though I mean it's one of the
biggest times in human history where if
you talk about the Europeans coming to
North America and what what happened to
the Native Americans just from diseases
I mean it's it's one of the biggest
genocides in history not now when you
talk about 90% of a population wiped out
by disease I mean that's almost almost
impossible genocide didn't happen
because of the disease the disease did
what the diseases did but the genocide
happened through colonization the
genocide happened through u.s. Indian
policy that continues today the genocide
is ongoing so this is not something from
the past this is something that
continues today that we still are
working to fight against that's why the
my organization is here right that's
that's absolutely true I just was
getting into those no it's fine I want
you to talk about everything you want to
talk about but so let's let's go to that
then since this is the United States has
a very strange situation with Native
Americans where Native Americans have
reservations and on those reservations
they have sovereignty they can they have
different rules that can do what they
want it's very strange it's like there's
nations inside of our nation mm-hmm like
how do you feel about that so it's a
system that's been imposed by maybe the
best way to start is kind of start with
the beginning like how did how did how
did we get to where we are today there
phoof and there's a lot of information
and so you got to stop me if I start
getting to care
all right no work we have plenty of time
and a lot of interest so don't worry
about that
so there are three Supreme Court cases
that happened in the 1800s and there was
a Justice named John Marshall who was
actually buying Indian land from from us
the US government through u.s. grants
and so he was interest he was an
interested party but he was making
decisions that that set forward the kind
of watershed principles that continued
affect who Native Americans and Indian
nation governments are today and so
those three cases the first one was
called Johnson V McIntosh and it was in
1823 and it didn't involve any Indians
it was a non-indians coming to court to
try to determine who owned a piece of
land in Indiana and there was one guy
Johnson who was a plaintiff who had
purchased the land directly from the
peon cushaw Indians who were related to
the Miami tribe today and then the
defendant was McIntosh and he purchased
land from the US government and so the
case of course was who had the proper
rights and threw that case through the
narrative that John the justice marshal
created he brought forward a piece of
international law that affects us today
and that's the doctrine of discovery
have you ever heard of the doctrine and
the discovery so that's that's any
Christian civilized European nation has
the right to conquer indigenous heathen
peoples so this was the principle that
this case was based on and it set
forward this weird relationship the
tribes in the US government have today
so if the u.s. if the christian european
peoples had the rights to take land away
from tribes because they were in fee
area race which is this this is language
from the case they're inferior race
they're savages they're unable to govern
themselves and they only have a right of
occupancy so that was the first of three
cases that Justice Marshall decided and
of course he was an interested party in
the whole thing because he had purchased
land from the United States and he
wanted to make sure his land was secure
the second case was Cherokee Nation V
Georgia and this was a time during the
Indian Removal Act that Andrew Jackson
had gotten through Congress to remove
the eastern Indians west of the
Mississippi River into Indian Territory
which is of course now Oklahoma Kansas
Texas area and and again this was a case
that actually the Cherokee Nation tried
to bring before the Supreme Court and
before the supreme court could even make
a decision on the and I just realized I
didn't even tell you the facts of the
case so there was I'm getting ahead of
myself I apologize no this is this is
incredible experience to be here so I'm
a little bit nervous so in Cherokee
Nation versus Georgia Georgia was trying
to assert its laws over the Cherokee
Nation and so the Cherokee Nation
brought this case before the Supreme
Court to say you know the the this the
state does not have any right to assert
any of its laws against us and what
justice Marshall did is said well you're
not a foreign nation so you can't bring
a case before the Supreme Court and
determined that tribes were a pseudo
sovereign nation that they were still
under tutelage and they needed to be
civilized again the same kind of
inferior
savage language in this case and held
that the federal government had plenary
power over tribal affairs and that the
Cherokee Nation couldn't bring this case
to court so what ended up happened is
some missionaries who were serving the
Cherokee Nation actually developed a
case and violated Georgia laws so they
could bring a case before the Supreme
Court and that case was called rooster V
Georgia and I think that was about 1832
1831 and in that case it was ruled that
the United States had a guardian and
ward type relationship with tribes and
so we were the wards they were our
guardian and that set up this weird
dynamic that still exists today the
Supreme Court's and other case other
courts cite in in decisions today to
basically take away more and more rights
so so that was that's the watershed
basis for this weird relationship that
we have and it's based on racism it's
based on tribes being an inferior
peoples they not be civilized and and so
here we are so help help direct me into
another question here well that's a
fascinating thing the idea that the
United States government is that they're
like the big daddy yeah look over the
tribes and that the only way the tribes
can exist is if they exist the European
Way right the great white father yeah
mm-hmm and so all this was happening
wild they were trying to conquer the
west so all this was happening around
the goldrush time and this was happening
before then so this was opening in the
most of all the gold dress was 1850s
okay so forty-nine eggs a little bit
before that and they're trying to
they're basically trying to take over
land right oh absolutely absolutely
so Georgia wanted that land for
themselves they wanted to remove the
Cherokee and of course the other
quote/unquote civilized tribes that were
in the southeast at that time and that's
what's so interesting is because you see
throughout time and this is a this is a
little bit why I have a problem with
some of the books that you've read is
because they've taken small pictures of
what was going on and kind of removed
the context of what was really happening
there are so many tribes across the
United States that tried everything to
resist or comply or assimilate so that
they could maintain their way of life
maintain their lands and continue to
prosper as they had been but the United
States was obviously for a formidable
opponent and regardless of for example
the Five Civilized tribes and their
their tactic was to assimilate was to go
to school and educate themselves and
learn English and even though they did
that and they did everything that the
United States wanted them to do they
were forced off their land to the west
into Indian Territory the Comanche who
you've learned about through the book
they that those events happen during a
point of time and that was their effort
at resistance they saw how disease wiped
out their brethren from other nations
they knew that folks who are coming to
get them and so that was their way of
resisting being assimilated and having
everything taken away from them in the
defense of the authors of those books
they did cover a lot of that they these
books are in no way taking the side of
the United States government you know
most of them I mean the most amazing
thing about Empire the summer moon was
just how special the relationship that
the Comanches had to the land and about
how
and Jess can Parker's I wouldn't know
Cynthia Cynthia Ann Parker who's she's
the photo out there the woman that's
breastfeeding her child she was
kidnapped when she was 9 and assimilated
with the Comanches and then was wreak it
nap by the United States government when
she was in her 30s and didn't want to go
back she missed the Comanche life and
threw her and threw her depictions and
her descriptions of the way they lived
and the understanding of it they got a
better sense of like what she missed
about that life and that they had an
incredible relationship with the land
they lived basically just in teepees
they were very nomadic they just
followed around the Buffalo and they had
you know in in her way of looking at it
on a magical existence in comparison to
this really boring life that these
settlers had and when you know she
looked at it it was interesting because
she was a girl who was born you know a
how would you describe it a white
settler and then from the age of nine on
lived as a Comanche so she had like sort
of a view of both worlds and you know
she very much took the side of the
Comanches and she wanted to go back like
she had spoken Comanche in the book
there's an encounter where they bring in
someone who was a Comanche to speak to
her and she grabs him she's like take me
back we're gonna leave let's get out of
here now
like her thought was like we got to get
out of here like this way of life is
bullshit like I want to go back to the
Comanches but she just didn't understand
that that way of life was slowly going
away and her son Quanah Parker who is
that photograph over there that's on
bullets that somebody made for me I
don't even know where that came from
somebody sent me that but that he was
the last Comanche chief and they by the
during her lifetime and her son's
lifetime was the last of it and it's a
very sad story but you know the Comanche
still live today right sure in Oklahoma
right there's quite a few of them under
I've actually been in contact with some
of those guys oh that's awesome
yes it's very cool but the
do but they don't live the way they did
right I mean their way of life was
removed I mean they were wiped out in in
in that in that sense but cultures
aren't static right and we're not static
and I think one of the the major issues
that American Indians have is that we
are often stereotyped into this this
picture and if we don't fit that then
we're not legitimately Indian when you
when you first met me what did you think
do you think well sir brown skin where's
where's the feathers I mean this is no
no I don't think you did but I guess
it's a rhetorical question oh hell yes
so are you 100% Native American no
absolutely not just a Georgia um and
that's that's let's talk about that
let's talk about that
what other so blood-quantum is an
imposition from the federal government
that is that has been used to weed out
Native Americans so the whole the whole
idea of US federal policy has been to
assimilate Indians to rid themselves of
the Indian problem so that land and
resources could be obtained right and so
blood-quantum was one way that the US
government could do that so if you if
you didn't meet what they thought was
some kind of purity test then they could
write you off right but that is not how
many Indian nations view tribal
citizenship or membership it's through
other types of cultural continuity
family relationships and it's not about
race that's been an imposition on us so
I'm polish and Choctaw so half and half
something like something like that
Cynthia Ann Parker is probably a good
example of them right because she wasn't
0% Native American but was purely to
mansion right right we're absolutely
absolutely Italians are very similar I'm
at
but I have a last name that's Irish
because I'm one-quarter Irish so growing
up around Italians it was always like a
way they made fun of me you know it was
like it was always a funny thing like
are you sure you're Italian like this
this it's you know it's like it's a
purity test like Italians like a nice
last name with a lot of vowels you know
it's that's what they like and it's
really interesting so as executive
director of the Association on American
Indian Affairs we get tons of inquiries
probably the top inquiry we get are
people wanting to do DNA tests to
determine what tribe they belong to
so everyone seems to want to be Indian
and even some people are emboldened
enough to say you know hey I did my DNA
test it says I'm Native American where's
my Indian check really there's so many
misconceptions about what it means to be
Native American that's a real issue yes
it that doesn't exist but there's some
kind of fantasy or myth that many people
in the US have kind of believed about
Indians because we don't know it's not
like it's taught well in school it's
it's not like this is part of a normal
dialogue and correct me if I'm wrong but
I don't believe that it can really
clearly identify what nation you're from
no DNA test can you can't identify
whether you have certain genetic traits
that might be from North America like
Canada or might be from South America as
well right right yeah so if you really
want to learn about your history and
heritage you have to do that
genealogical research and if you weren't
aware there's 574 federally recognized
tribes and about 300 other tribal groups
in the United States and other on top of
the 400 yeah that aren't recognized by
the United States for many reasons and
so each one of those tribes have their
own laws they have their own systems of
governance their own whether it's a more
traditional form of government or
written constitutional government each
one of them have their own eligibility
requirements for citizenship so you have
to do your own genealogy and then if you
do find who you may be affiliated with
and you go to that nation and you talk
to them about what their eligibility
requirements are some of them are
residency some of them are familial
relations and in some of them are
blood-quantum
the term Indian is that okay to use
that's actually a legal term of art so
Indian is a defined legal term in
federal law of art it's a legal term of
art that was sorry I'm a lawyer that
just means that it's it's a defined
federal term that has a specific
definition in in u.s. code we tend to
like to be called the nation that we
belong to right who are people so for
you would be Choctaw rock top right and
for others whatever a lot of people use
native-american and that's that's more
that's a broad term because that really
can define folks from south of the
invisible border north of the invisible
border mm-hmm and in the Western
Hemisphere so it's a much broader term
indigenous peoples is a great great term
yeah a lot of people in Canada they use
first nation first nation you know they
have a very interesting relationship
with First Nation people up there it's
similar but different mm-hmm you know
they have very different rules in terms
of like hunting and fishing and they
basically could do whatever they want
whereas the people that live I have
friends live in Alberta
yeah and First Nation people can you
know they don't have hunting seasons
they just do whatever they want they
basically say look let's just pretend
like we never invaded and you just live
how you would normally mm-hmm but with
modern equipment yeah so it's it's a
little odd but there's no way getting
around it being odd I mean I think one
of the things that I got out of this
recent obsession
with American Indian culture and these
stories was realizing how little I knew
about the history of this country you
know you you might know you might have a
basic understanding of what happened
that you learned in school it's real
peripheral you know it's very surface
and then upon reading these books and
made me realize like what happened here
like this what happened here over the
course of a couple hundred years is
almost unprecedented in in history like
that this nation was conquered by all
these invaders that just kept coming in
kept changing the rules kept breaking
trees making treaties breaking treaties
wiping people out calling things battles
when they were really just massacres of
women and children I mean there's some
horrendous horrendous stories of the
justification of these massacres that
were no different than any other
horrific barbarian slaughter that you
might have heard about in history that's
looked down upon but for years in this
country they were taught as if they were
actual battles I mean the history of
this country with in regards to the
tribes and American settlers and the
soldiers is terrifying it's terrifying
that this just happened a couple of
hundred years ago and that people are
capable of these things and that the
ancestors of these people are just
roaming around today and that's what
this country was founded on this country
was founded on massacres right and and
and that policy has been studied by
folks like Adolf Hitler and it was even
included he talked about studying how
the u.s. treated American Indians in his
book Mein Kampf really yes so and but it
wasn't just the battles there have been
many different types of battles that we
consider warfare though it hasn't been
done with you know guns and legal right
legal battles exactly
I mean since the 1600s Europeans have
been trying to educate us and assimilate
us and civilize us and have passed laws
once the United States became a new
country in the 1800's passed laws to
take our children and move them far away
and and punish them if they spoke their
language cut their hair put them in the
schools that were military based and
they studied academics in the morning
and then they did trade in the afternoon
and in those trades were to help pay for
the schools so they were basically
indentured servants slave labor making
sure that the school could have enough
funds to pay for their own education and
the boarding school history in the
United States and Canada has horrendous
horrendous stories and the these schools
were funded by the US federal government
and the Association and other groups are
trying to get the United States to
release records of who were the children
in these schools we think there's there
were about 500 boarding schools across
the United States and about at least
20,000 children that we can figure out
were were killed were duck died in these
schools yeah so there's the Carlisle
some of this work has been done at the
Carlisle Indian School in in
Pennsylvania which is now owned by the
Army Corps Army Corps of Engineers and
there are some tribes that are trying to
repatriate
their children that are in graves there
and bring them back home so this has
been a process all over the country
trying to figure out you know who these
children were where they belong in
and to bring them home and it's it's
been a really difficult process for the
organization's all of them died disease
not being fed working too much all those
things that could kill a child and all
these things there's records of all
these different children and the places
they still no we haven't been able to
folks that are doing this work have not
been able to find all the records and
like I said the federal government
probably doesn't have the records
probably has mismanaged a lot of the
records of regarding these boarding
schools and and there were different
times there have been different eras of
Indian policy where the federal
government was like oh wait this isn't
working let's let's get out of this
business of teaching Indians let's give
it to the churches let them do it for a
while and then it would come back in to
the federal government and but the
churches would have it and of course
we've heard all of the horrible things
that that different churches have done
to children and there are still many
boarding school survivors today that can
tell those stories of abuse sexual and
physical and who still live with that
today there's a organization called the
Native American boarding school healing
coalition that is really working on
these kind of issues and have are
pulling together the stories and are
also working with survivors to try to
heal from that that trauma that's not
just theirs but it's it's this insured
intergenerational historic trauma that
has been with our communities for a
couple hundred years now so there there
are a lot of stories like that and this
again this is US federal policy you know
they would while they were while the US
was building the reservation system and
and and putting tribes kind of in these
blockades if you did not send your child
to school you weren't given
rations you weren't given your food if
you practiced your culture you you could
be killed for practicing your culture
using your language because and because
this was the assimilation policy of the
day and this happened I would say 1850
1870s through the 1920s there was this
horrific period of federal Indian policy
of doing trying to do away with language
communal type living cultural practices
and religion so this isn't just you know
done warfare this has been a continuing
policy that even affects us today
so it was gun warfare until they got the
Indians to move into the reservation and
then it was basically an annihilation of
the culture right and it meets all the
definitions of genocide from the from
international law one of the things that
they talked about in Black Elk was the
practice of the Ghost Dance the this
idea that they were going to somehow or
another bring back the old ways and it's
a sad sad story yeah when you hear them
talk about it especially because it's
coming from the words of Black Elk who
was a guy that was there with the Battle
of Little Bighorn and then from then now
is an older man talking about what what
his experiences have been like haven't
had seen his people moved to
reservations and seen basically every
single treaty broken I mean was there a
single treaty the United States had with
the Indians that it didn't break mm-hm
that would that's insane I mean every
single one and most treaties had some
similar language a lot of them talked
about they had bad man provisions so bad
man provisions were basically if armed
in the US if our men come in and to your
jurisdiction and do something bad we'll
take care of it for you you know just
some simple provisions like that but
that never
was enforced the u.s. let let their
people come in and take over what we're
supposed to be protective areas of land
and and that was just constant that
happened that happened everywhere so
there were bad man provisions there were
a lot of provisions a lot of beautiful
provisions that that tribes still talk
about today you know as as long as the
the grass grows and you know we'll have
our lands and and none of these
provisions were ever upheld and a lot of
the East Coast tribes there their
boundaries were changed and new treaties
were made and accepted and and removal
happened in and there were new treaties
and nothing was ever maintained where
did you grow up did you grow up in
Oakland Oklahoma you grew up on a
reservation so Oklahoma is an
interesting case so Oklahoma did have
set aside land so Choctaw had their area
Chickasaw and the other tribes that were
removed to Oklahoma and by the way
because of that removal their tribes
that were already there were removed so
there were already tribes there that
Caddo and Comanche and other other
tribes that this was already their land
so new tribes moved in and land during
the hmm I'm forgetting my dates now but
there was a commission around 1906 or so
where there was a census and individual
Indians were allotted about a hundred
and sixty acres apiece
and this was an effort to decrease the
amount of land base that tribes held in
common right and this happened all
across the country not just in Oklahoma
where there were allotment policies
and I believe there there were about
heck I'm not good with numbers I think
there were like 19 million acres that
that were removed this way of land but
what happened today there is a criminal
case before the Supreme Court that is
actually addressing these issues because
even though our lands were allotted the
exterior boundaries of our reservations
the area that we had agreed to live in
they've never been extinguished they've
never been diminished and so the Supreme
Court says act Supreme Court is actually
looking at this issue now as to whether
we still have jurisdiction within the
exterior boundaries of our reservations
in Oklahoma would that extend to cities
other cities in Oklahoma that are in
those areas now yeah so if you think of
Tulsa yeah so that's Creek Nation so it
also would be owned well so not
necessarily so so it's raised a lot of
fear with with non-indians about why
yeah the Indians were taken back the
land oh my god but what would actually
happen there's a lot of places in Indian
country where there's allotment and
there's there's non-indian individuals
who have feel and within exterior
boundaries of reservations and then
individual Indians owning feel and
within the exterior boundaries
reservation land feel and so just how
you woody
no no so how you own land it's called
it's not restricted it's it's in fee you
own the title to that land right a lot
of land held by tribes is in trust or in
restricted fee so a common area land
like like let's look at them the
Onondaga Nation in in New York State
they have the exterior boundaries of
their reservation they own restricted
feel and so they own it but they can't
without us permission right trust land
is similar and it's treated the same as
restricted fee but it's held in trust so
the US has more control of what happens
on that land or has been seen to have a
little more control than it would and
just restricted fee but within the
exterior boundaries of the reservation
you can have this checkerboarded
ownership of land of non-indians and
Indians and and but that doesn't
necessarily mean that the tribe has
jurisdiction over the non-indian feel
and and the the civil and criminal
jurisdiction issues on an area of land
like that is extremely complex and
continues to be argued in the courts and
most of the time our jurisdiction
most of the time we lose those cases
especially since the 80s and 90s and up
until today we've there was really a
change in kind of how the Supreme Court
decided Indian law cases so if we go
back into the history of federal Indian
policy you see this kind of weird
schizophrenic you know those those those
Marshall cases that I talked about they
really set forward kind of schizophrenic
principles that the Indians are
sovereign but they're they're just a
ward and they're uncivilized so we have
to take care of them but their sovereign
and so you have a different areas of
eras of time policymakers who who
support tribal sovereignty and we'll use
those cases to help support that
sovereignty and then there are other
administrations that come around not
talking about any current administration
but that that used those cases against
us and in degrade policy and degrade any
kind of rights that we may have gained
in
other eras so it's it's really been you
know Indians today live in this live in
such an insecure world you know our
statistics are horrible
you know the suicide rate for our youth
our high school graduates everything
that you could possibly think of there's
a statistic on we're usually the lowest
or the worst and it's because we live in
a society that is constantly changing we
can never depend on whether or not our
rights are secured whether or not we're
going to have land jobs be able to
practice our culture we're still trying
to you know there were a period of
periods of time in our history where
people would steal our religious objects
and our sacred items they still do and
loot our graves
there there's a law called the Native
American graves protection and
repatriation act that was meant to
repatriate those stolen items and those
stolen ancestors back to tribes so that
we could help with our cultural
revitalization as well as put our
ancestors back to rest there are still
at least 200,000 ancestors in boxes and
museums Jesus that's just in the u.s.
200,000 in museums in the u.s. just in
the US so our ancestors and our cultural
items and religious objects have also
been taken all around the world imagine
if it was French people it was 200
thousand French people in boxes and
museums in the US and France is one of
the the worst so there was just a case a
recently French loved to auction our
sacred objects for some reason there was
a sacred shield of the Pueblo of akima
in about 2016 that was being sold at
auction in in France
and the the tribe the pueblos fought and
even went to court in France to try to
stop that auction and get that item back
because there was evidence that it had
been stolen in contemporary times and
France said you don't have standing in
our courts so even though they're
considered sovereign or a pseudo
sovereign nation here in the United
States we didn't have standing in in the
French Court and couldn't protect that
item this way so we had to use other
means of negotiation and arm-twisting
that item has finally been repatriated
but it took it took about four years to
for that to happen so it's finally been
properly yeahit's but that's that's just
one case this happens where is it now
it's back it's back home at the acoma
pueblo and no this is a sacred object
you can see on display right these are
items that are used for religious
purposes they're there they're protected
sacred items and the Association we were
fighting with the Metropolitan Museum of
Art last year in the year before because
they were displaying items from a
private collection that were sacred one
item was even a funerary object was an
item that is never supposed to be seen
because it's buried with the ancestor
and it was on display and without any
kind of consultation with the tribes
affected it's horrendous the way we
still look at Indian people and and our
cultures and our practices today we're
still being called heathens there was an
article I think just last week there was
a religious man saying that were
heathens because we we this sage that I
gave you because we burn sage
as one of our medicinal and spiritual
pratt was the reason why they were
calling you even yeah and this was just
in an article last week from a what from
a Christian group oh well yeah yes the
it seems like the issue of what we're
talking about but youth suicide high
school graduation drug addiction all
those problems those those are the most
massive ones and what could be done to
try to mitigate these problems
hmm like if you had a magic wand mhm and
I mean it's been I mean if you if you
talk about Native American reservations
in this country you people talk about
poverty they talk about drug addiction
and alcoholism they talk about despair I
mean this is something that was also
brought up in the book Black Elk so this
seems to be something that started when
they were forced into reservations in
the first place and then were ashamed of
their heritage because of the fact they
were subjugated by these these I mean
whatever you want to call them the the
soldiers the the military what could be
done what if you had a magic wand and
you said and I said Shan and what can
what can be done to give you you you
have all the money at your disposal what
would you do well there's there's no
quick fix to issues like that and people
have been trying to work with tribes
regarding poverty and addiction and
there's no quick fix there's no quick
fix well I think what what there is and
and what we're working to do see my
organization's almost 100 years old and
and we're looking forward to the next
hundred years what are we going to do
and there is really important work done
being done regarding healing from
historic trauma in its community work
its work that engages the entire
community so it's not just directed at
young people it's not just directed at a
segment it's it really involves a whole
community coming together and healing
but what also really needs to happen is
we need to bring people like you along
with us so we need if if we can't clear
away the myths that euro America or
white America whatever you want to call
it if we can't clear away those myths
that we continually face every day every
time I go into Washington DC damn it
every time I go into the Wegmans there's
a big Washington football team
Tostitos potato chips with the
Washington football team name on there
and and the Redskins and I was that
offensive word that's an offensive me
even saying that like right there is
that offensive yes yes not to everybody
but the majority of Native American
groups tribes they've all let the team
know that that that that name is
offensive and they still won't change it
they don't they say it's honoring it's
honoring Native Americans that term is
used and you see it in historic records
to count Indian skins or scalps that
have been taken from Indian people it's
an offensive it's not just derogatory or
demeaning but it's we should be really
clear what you're saying we've seen
skins and scalps I mean dead people yeah
yeah yeah
and sorry oh no no worries listen this
is the number-one reason why I wanted to
have you here yeah I want I want it from
your perspective because for us we get
oh yeah that's an offensive word here
that's offensive I heard that's
offensive mm-hmm the majority people are
not talking to someone who's deeply
ingrained in Native American issues and
culture like you're so you get explained
to us that you know it makes sense right
if we of those it was you know think
about some
auditory term for someone somewhere I
mean even if it was like kind of
derogatory like if they were called the
Washington Krauts and it was all based
on Germans like a lot of German people
probably be really pissed off at that
like hey you know that's kind of shitty
like why you calling us that
but it's the Chiefs Kansas City Chiefs
are like what other Native American
names there's been a ton of them right
yeah
Braves there's a lot of Britons other
Braves still around
yeah yes they still have that name so
all is anybody give it given in and
change their name I'm I yes there has
and there's been really a movement with
high school colleges and I don't know
the status of any you know as far as NFL
or national teams Syracuse Syracuse
University had a derogatory mascot that
they changed some years back because of
the tribes there they're now in the
state of New York
fought for that what was that mascot I
can't remember but now they're there
there's some kind of like orange it's an
orange super orange yeah yeah exactly
but but but if we're ever going to fix
these issues I think we really need to
start with our public education system
we need to teach people that Indians are
still here we're still alive it's
amazing how many people don't even
realize that that Indian people exist
outside of casinos it is kind of crazy
if you think about it there's not
another culture that gets named it gets
teams named after them we're we have
Indians all around us all the time just
go to the grocery store and buy some
butter or some baking soda look at look
at different yeah it pop culture
Tomahawk missile the Indian motorcycle
and and the the Pontiac had a I think an
Indian head on
it's a car back in the day I think you
know it was a yeah
it's it's all over our our culture it's
all around us but yet we don't even
realize that that what that means yeah
and so it really to many of us you would
think it would open up a dialogue about
about Indian people and and whether
we're going to choose to do something
different with this history because it
is our history it's our collective
history and we have throughout time
changed the narrative and stories of our
history you know when when we've all
realized that Columbus wasn't such a
great guy that took a long time yeah
yeah well what do you think about that
you're Italian crazy
it's crazy that it took so long to
figure out that he was a sociopath and a
murderer I mean what would you read the
accounts of the the different religious
people that were traveling with Columbus
wrote I forget what they were what what
their designation was but there was one
journal that detailed what they did to
Native American babies shattered their
heads on rocks and cut people's arms off
if they didn't bring their weight and
gold to them I mean horrific horrific
tales of torture and murder
mm-hmm and it's like how is this the guy
that we have a day off for how is this
Columbus thing you realize what Columbus
was a conqueror I mean he was just a
symbol of the times music 1492 it was a
brutal time in human history and when
they arrived in what they mean that
really didn't even arrive here but when
they arrived wherever they did arrive it
was the worst thing that could have ever
possibly happened to the people that
were already living there and that this
guy is somehow or another you know a
part of our folklore you know 1492
Columbus sailed the ocean blue and all
that nonsense and meanwhile he's a
fucking murderer
and it's it's kind of crazy yeah that
they knew this but it took until now I
mean
didn't they change it to indigenous
peoples day well there are still cities
counties States that are still in the
process of changing that I'm not sure I
think there are some cities in in
California that have already done that
and you know celebrate indigenous
peoples day Columbus Ohio not named
after Columbus though right is it named
after another dude no what's it named
after Columbus it is giant statue of in
front of City Hall change that shit so
late you got a Columbus hat on bro you
piece of shit I'm sorry I was trying to
ignore that okay I'm sorry thanks a lot
thanks a lot I feel really welcome
that's right the Cleveland Indians
another one I forgot about the Atlanta
Braves the Washington Redskins it is
nuts when you stop and think about how
many American teams are named after
Indians animals and Indians Columbus man
fuck you Columbus change your name what
would they change it to name it after a
lake or something well name it after a
cool Native American did that be okay
yeah all right whoo I would I would I
would consult with the Native Americans
before right they would have to be
someone from Ohio like what what nation
is in Ohio well there's not any now
there are indigenous peoples there but
there are no federally recognized tribes
in Ohio Wow so who are the indigenous
people that are not federally recognized
I'm not sure but I know that there was
Indiana Ohio that was Miami tribe there
in Oklahoma but there are say Miami
you mean Miami this city no they're a
tribe people okay because you were
saying that earlier and I was I was
gonna correct you I was gonna ask you
rather have you meant the city no no I'm
so much Jimmy is did Miami get named
after Native Americans I don't know I
don't know but I would I would think so
there's a lot of place names that are
named after indigenous rivals so Miami
is a type of it's a trosset yes yes and
and they're in Oakland
how confusing there in northern Oklahoma
they probably said the Miami people you
can keep it
but what's interesting in these states
like Indiana and Ohio where indigenous
peoples have just been removed whole
heartedly is that tons of archaeologists
and other people that like to loot they
have taken so many things out of the
ground there was a case that the FBI
actually got ahold of in Indiana
gentleman by the name of Don Miller who
had a huge ranch house and farm and it
was just full of Native American
artifacts including human remains and
there were even items from other
countries that he had had looted and
taken and the FBI actually investigated
that and and because the man was like 90
years old they didn't prosecute him but
they were able to take back those items
and through that Native American graves
protection and repatriation act they've
been consulting with tribes to
repatriate those items back but that
looting and collecting and in areas like
Indiana and Ohio Jimmy actually has it
up on the screen oh yeah I find two
thousand human bones among antiquities
seized from man's home so where this
gentleman get all this stuff his
collection was Native American including
the bone Tim carpenter of the FBI told
media outlets yeah there have report
Miller reportedly admitted he'd
conducted illegal digging expeditions
but he never faced criminal charges
before his death in 2015 right so this
guy was just digging stuff up and just
showing it around his house and there
were rules against this oh absolutely
absolutely and oh with if it's on land
that say if he like just what if he owns
a ranch how does that work like if your
own it's it's dependent and a lot of the
things that that he had it wasn't clear
where he had got it from he didn't even
know or remember keep any records of
where he
got a lot of the items so our laws are
really screwy with this too so federal
and tribal lands are protected so public
lands parks and tribal lands are
protected lands you can't go and dig in
federal or tribal lands without a permit
among other things but just in state
private private lands it's really
dependent on what the state laws are and
and it's it's really inconsistent
whether those whether looting is
protected or not mm-hmm and so that's
where it's interesting because there's a
lot of gigantic ranches in Texas that
are privately owned that were originally
Native American hunting grounds they've
there's ones that a friend of mine has
hunted on that they have these
pictographs you go inside these caves
and this is on private land someone owns
this you go inside these caves and
there's ancient artwork all over the
walls of the cave and signs of fire like
you know soot on the ceiling of the cave
where they lit campfires like this
should probably be some sort of a
historical site right and it's it's
usually not protected and and people get
real angry when Indians try to get
involved in where there may be
developments that will have an effect on
a burial site a sacred site or other
other type of site people really get
angry and so it's really hard for tribes
to work to protect these areas work to
learn about what the areas are even
about there's been so much amateur
archaeology in this whole country was
founded on amateur archaeology let's dig
up look at what we found in this grave
you know everyone was looking for for
gold and other special things and
oftentimes they just took whatever was
in the grave and and and created the
Antiquities art market which still is is
all over the world today
so the Association is constantly looking
at at auctions and trying to return
items that that private collectors have
obtained improperly we just got a human
vertebra removed from a u.s. auction
just a couple of weeks ago they were
selling it because they said it had an
arrow point still in you know so that
that has value and in some markets and
this they had done DNA on this to prove
that no it was they were selling it as a
Native American vertebra it was from a
collector in in Massachusetts well how
could they prove that it wasn't just a
settler that was killed by an arrow
right I don't know and that's the thing
about that's the thing about trying to
work with auctions and private
collectors as they often don't want to
work with us because they're trying to
make money so oftentimes items whether
they're religious objects or human
remains they have a story or what's
called a provenance associated with them
that is often made up to drive the price
of the item so whether that was a
legitimate vertebra of a Native American
we don't know because we can't get that
collector to talk to us so the collector
is under no obligation by law to talk to
you know why we try to send the FBI in
our friend Tim carpenter to them so how
would they determine they mean wouldn't
they have to do a DNA analysis of the
bones and try to figure out where who
the person was well the DNA analysis
isn't necessarily going to tell you
where it came from it could tell you
that it was Native American would they
even be able to get that out of bones I
don't know and I'm not a scientist but
you know there was a there was a case
really not that long ago called the
Kennewick Man case I don't know if maybe
you heard of it but it was a an ancestor
was uncovered in in the state of
Washington
and he was old old old old and the
universities involved in the Army Corps
who had possession of it we're going to
repatriate it to appropriate tribes and
what ended up happening is that you know
academia stepped up and said hi wait
this isn't Native American we think he's
something else and for years
Native Americans fought to get that
ancestor ancient one back and finally
after a court case that deemed the item
wasn't that the ancestor wasn't Native
American DNA test was done and it was
indeed Native American and and the
ancestor was finally repatriated to how
that works
so yeah listen there's you said there's
five hundred recognized tribes many more
that are unrecognized who would that go
to right so like say if you won and it's
brought back and given to Native
Americans to who and to where right so
so so let's look at the best-case
scenario and in in a lot of museums have
maintained records that may have human
remains and associated funerary objects
and have enough information to know
where that came from what side it was
located at what County what state and we
know from tribal histories as well as
federal us documentation that that that
area was likely affiliated with with you
know this tribe or that tribe or maybe
several tribes and so consultation
occurs under that law about those
ancestral remains and funerary objects
and it's determined where those items
should go back in the worst case
scenario where there's not any
information oftentimes evidence of well
who were the collectors that were giving
to
institution what has been the history of
the institution and where has it
obtained different collections and
through that you know it's deduced who
may be affiliated with with those those
items or the the ancestors so it can be
a pretty long drawn-out process but
what's interesting about it as museums
and other institutions fought this law
for a long time and they said well you
know all of our collections will you
know we won't be able to fulfill our
purpose as a museum or an academic
institution to study these things it's
like well hell you haven't studied it in
a hundred years
ya know most most of these when when
people work to consult with museums most
of these items are in boxes and often
poorly managed and maintained so they're
just sitting somewhere in storage right
so the museum owns it and they're kind
of hoarding it yeah interesting yeah so
this Kennewick Man can you pull up some
information about that
yeah great because I'm getting my dates
yeah I'm very curious about what the
dates would be now when we're talking
about Native Americans um
do you agree with the idea okay let's
see here kind of Wick man finally it's
free but they did so much study skills
and ever found in North America there's
a handsome fellow let me see that
picture looks normal
why didn't you just ran into that guy at
7-eleven like what's up bro
click sticker he's like hey a modern
American a modern human I should say
that's the bones Fairs bones Wow his rib
bones so what is it what does it give us
a date on his what they have Carl go to
that picture the teeth again that's
crazy so so just let me tell you that
looking at human remains for many tribal
peoples is difficult it's like looking
at a naked body I mean it's it's the
essence of someone that
you know we shouldn't be seeing Oh
seeing even these images that that
should have been in the ground that
should have gone and disappeared it had
a journey it got interrupted and and you
know it
some tribes and cultures believe that
that's harmful to interact or look at or
just a little bit humiliating hmm it's
exposed right it so so seeing them on
display in a museum it's particularly oh
yeah and and and I and at least in the
United States you won't find that in any
kind of public museum now you might in
some kind of private institution or
private collection well I do with
mummies right you-you'd but with Native
American people they've decided that
that's offensive to the culture so
they've removed as well that's also
happening you're finding another in
other countries who in Egypt for example
in other cultures that they're trying to
get those back to imagine we can go and
look at Ronald Reagan's head Yeah right
some people would probably enjoy that
for sure I'd go but is one of those
things where it's like okay I gotta get
it right so if you have the bones of
Sitting Bull on display in some sort of
a you know Plexiglas case in a museum
and people like oh wow that's cool okay
what would that be cool if that was
Ronald Reagan you know would that be
cool that was someone from our you know
our lifetime the die was that Janis
Joplin's head you know in a box
somewhere and you can go stare at it
wouldn't that weird you out
or how about Amy Winehouse how about
someone that died yeah see what I'm
saying yeah someone who died really
recently it'd be like what are you doing
well and now we need to look at it that
way yeah well and that's the thing is
that we don't seem to look at native
people in that way we don't seem to go
oh that's not okay oh it's not okay to
outlaw their religion well how would I
feel if someone did that to me right
right this it's it's a double standard
or I don't know what you
all it but it's just recess someone yeah
in a way we're yeah racism is the right
word can you go to the Kennewick Man
again and find out what the date is I'm
just curious as to what the date is of
his demise like when what they date his
skeleton back to because this is
something that someone actually had
brought up to me that there are many
Native American cultures that don't
believe the story of people coming
across the bering land bridge from Asia
mm-hmm
is that something that's just one story
so that's just one theory about how the
Western Hemisphere was populated there
are many of those stories and what's
interesting is it's like it's a lot of
indigenous peoples have and have stories
that go back hundreds and hundreds of
years and there's a great book so if you
really want some good books we've got to
get you into some indigenous authors one
of which is vine deloria who is passed
on but he he was an attorney and a
scholar and wrote a book in the late 60s
early 70s called custard died for your
sins and it was no it's known as the
Indian manifesto right but he also wrote
a diver's custard Iverson's
vine Deloria he also wrote a book called
red earth White Lies and he talks about
Western science and and it's arrogance
of of creating these theories like the
Bering Strait land bridge and never
really considering never going and
asking indigenous peoples who who lived
on the land and whose place was the land
how they got there because they do have
those stories of how they got there and
and and what is the story the most
Native Americans accept is it the idea
that they came from a bunch of different
places it's it's their own origin
stories for example the Choctaw Nation
has a few origin stories one of it which
includes coming out of the ground at a
certain certain area in the south
East come out of the ground coming out
of the ground so being birthed out of
the ground in a certain area and then
there's another migration story so a lot
of I have one elder said okay you want
to hear an origin story do you want the
5000-year version the twenty thousand
year version the forty thousand year
version and he would go into the story
about how many people in the southwest
and southeast and up into the Northeast
actually came from the south and were
slaves of Aztec and and other
civilizations down south that had been
released and began migrating up through
the north and there are other stories
that that have us come from other places
by boat I mean that there were also
great canoe and and water fairs and so I
think there's a lot a lot to unpack
there that science really has ignored
and vine deloria is great though when he
talks about these things in red earth
white lies because he has a sense of
humor about it and he talks about oh
yeah here we are in in in Asia wow
there's a big sheet of ice up there that
looks like a good place to go let's go
and he talks about how there's theories
of trees and horses that at a certain
period of time that that migrated back
and forth among the land bridge and how
that could have occurred and how how
sometimes it doesn't seem quite logical
what science has put together there so
he knows a full story about the land
bridge though like the scientific
diversion story yeah I mean it really
was a country I mean it was it was not
just like a thin bridge we're trying to
know it was as a big sheet of ice that
may have had one little areas of the
where you could survive but from what I
understand about it
yeah maybe I probably don't know it well
enough but there's a Nigel I mean it's
it's it's the way they're changing the
way they look at it but the way that
they're right but the way the theory
began when it was just a very small
group of scientists who who made a
determination that this was the way that
the Western Hemisphere was populated and
and what a lot of indigenous scholars
contemplated was that was an easy way to
basically devalue our place in the
Western Hemisphere
we came from somewhere else yes that's
the resistance the the science behind it
was that the oceans were lower the
oceans were lower during the Ice Age and
they believed that that area between
Asia and North America was not just like
a land bridge but was a land mass that
was populated with animals and that this
it would have been a natural progression
for human beings to make their way
across that in fact it's a funny story
there was a guy who was a Mormon who was
trying to prove that Native Americans
were The Lost Tribe of Israel right and
do you know the story behind that oh yes
yeah so he did DNA tests on Native
Americans and find out that they
actually came from Siberia that's one of
the scientific substantiation of the
landmass theory but there are other
there are other migrations that are
still well I'm I'm a hundred percent
convinced that people have been
traveling the world I mean just like the
Polynesians land Hawaii you know I mean
we people have done wild shit from the
beginning of time I mean there's so many
confusing artifacts and things in North
America and South America particularly
the Olmecs that the believer somewhere
in the neighborhood of 6,000 years old
and have very African looking faces and
their carvings or at least you know like
very thick lips and thick faces I mean
it's really interesting and then they
don't know where they came from they
don't they don't
much about their culture at all and
there's many myths of people arriving
places and in boats and traveling around
in boats so there's more likely to me is
that just people have had wanderlust
since the beginning of time when we
traveled all over the world and some
people came to North America and they're
like holy shit the spots awesome right
yeah but but we have a tendency to take
a few facts that we understand from
science or a few few sites that we're
able to find this happens a lot in North
America and and then base a theory on it
without really critical investigation
and and not getting all the facts and so
that's a indigenous peoples if it been
left out of those stories have been left
out of haven't been at the table to have
those discussions about what they
understand to be true about Canaries
what am I questions coming from is it
offensive because the insinuation is
that Native American people aren't
really American any you a they came from
somewhere else as well that everybody
came from somewhere else they just were
here a little bit earlier so it's not
theirs right that that's that's one idea
but yeah but if you know we've always
been considered an inferior race right
and the fact that we're still left out
of decision-making about our own lands
and our own rights and our own sacred
spaces we're still left out of decision
making or or our ideas are not even
considered in science they're not
considered in journalism they're not
considered in medicine or they're not
considered in what way what way they're
not considered in science there there's
traditional environmental knowledge that
a lot of people who deal in an
environmental protection have utilized
to help protect large areas and it has
to do with how different environments
how different
flora and fauna work together as a
collective versus oftentimes in our
Western Way of thinking we kind of you
know we kill all the wolves or we kill
all the Predators we get rid of all
these plants and animals that used to
all work together symbiotically in order
to create a healthy environment and and
and there's really important traditional
environmental knowledge by many wisdom
keepers across native america that are
trying to re-implement the things that
have gone wrong in their environments
and trying to replace what has been
screwed up when you hear an origin story
like the one we were talking about
people coming out of the earth mm-hmm
how do you decipher that well I've
actually been to that origin site and it
it looks like a female it's a place
where we were birthed it looks like a
female wood it looks like a place where
we were we were birthed out of Mother
Earth it's a beautiful amazing and
almost shocking place where is this
place this is in Mississippi so you
think that that might be true that's
that's our origin story or that's one of
our origin stories right but you
understand how scientifically that would
be a real problem right people coming
out of the ground like like poppies
maybe maybe not maybe not I think there
are there are stories and narratives
that were no longer connected with and
it our lives today are so out of context
with the natural world that we don't
know what's possible anymore we've been
so separated from that even to imagine
yeah but we have a clear line from
ancient hominids to modern human beings
science has been able to piece together
mm-hmm that's one that's one story right
that's a story and other stories we came
out of the ground like roses mm-hmm do
you think that's possible don't that
seems highly unlikely look if I give you
if you had money to bet I give you a
thousand bucks and you could put it on
this or that you could put it on well
we've probably people got here by all
sorts of means the way people got
everywhere by all sorts of means or they
came out of the ground like flowers or
Adam and Eve and all that other these
stories whether there are origin stories
that they create our identity they
create who we are at the center of our
being yeah and they have lessons to
teach us and they also remind us what
we're responsible for and that's what
I'm saying that we've been so separated
from that part of us in our connection
to the natural world and to the earth
right so we're a part of the earth we're
a part of come from the earth whether or
not we actually born on the ground is
we're really responsible for it so we
were put in certain places to be
responsible and care take for that area
so a lot of these stories what they're
they're essentially trying to connect
people with the idea that they are part
of this great earth they're a part of
this beautiful ecosystem and maybe this
origin story is devised to sort of
explain to them in a way that makes a
clear connection mm-hmm does that make
sense
no absolutely absolutely but but but
it's but it's part of who many tribal
nations are this is our place this is
our homeland this is what we're
responsible for and we haven't been able
to do what we were put here to do our
purpose has been ripped away from us so
so a lot of the work we do is to try to
you know work towards environmental
healing and try to bring
lands back into our land holdings so
that we can care take for that land
that's not that's not all over Indian
country there's there are some places in
Indian country that that extract oil and
and do things that that could be harmful
for the environment you know and and we
do what we can is you know with what we
got
and nations are sovereign the tribes are
sovereign so they get to decide what's
best for them and whether they're going
to be sustainable or not what do you
think would be best case scenario for
Native Americans the United States like
I'll sort of give you the magic wand
again like what would be best case
scenario because the strange thing that
we have in front of us here is that
there is one country the United States
but there's not just the United States
North American citizens here there's
also Native Americans of various
different tribes right that have their
own reservations and as you said they're
sovereign and they can kind of make
their own decisions what would be what's
the magic walk how do you clear up all
these problems associated with the mean
that the horrific treatment the
everything from alcoholism to the
problems with schools to self-esteem
issues all these problems in North
America while also not the the Native
Americans in the way I'm looking at it
they want to stay a member of their
tribe and they don't necessarily want to
be just Americans they want to keep
their heritage right universally mm-hmm
how does that how do those two things
work together how do you how do we all
live together in America and yet have
these tribes and do it in a way that
works best for everybody right well
that's a that's a complicated ask
question
you just freaking have even with a magic
wand I'm not quite but I guess but it's
a process and part of it is is these
myths that we have to correct and that
we have to we have to find a new way to
be able to tell our stories and not rely
on non-indian authors to tell our
stories but you need to hear our stories
from us we need to be able to tell our
stories and to reteach the general
public about who Native Americans are
where we've been and where we want to go
where don't we we we've had this kind of
pretend fantasy world about about
Indians uh you know Pocahontas
Columbus stories Custer
they've all been stories that have fed
into the American politic in a certain
way at certain periods of time and what
I want is that this is the time now
where tribal nations have a lot to lose
and we're in a current administration
that is trying to terminate us once
again what are they doing differently
than other administrations well they
they just they are taking land out of
trust status they would there are groups
that are attacking the basis of federal
Indian law and the rights that we do
have so there's there's an act called
the Indian Child Welfare Act was passed
in 1978 and it's an act that the
Association was heavily involved in to
get passed and it started with some work
with the Spirit Lake Sioux tribe and a
woman came to the people back then and
said they took my kids
they stole my children
and after investigation it was found
that it wasn't just happening at Spirit
Lake but it was happening all over
Indian country were state welfare
workers were taking Indian children in a
disproportionate rate a quarter of all
Indian children during that period of
time were taken away from their own
families and adopted out to white white
families and so the Indian Child Welfare
Act required state courts to do things
before a child was taken away from its
tribal nation there are groups now that
are working to dismantle that act and
that's being support because they they
think it's racist so they so it's it's
like they've taken it and and are
looking through the backwards mirror yes
so instead of it being an act that was
passed to protect our children and to
make sure that that children had ties to
their culture and their families they're
saying that that's not in the best
interest of children so they're still
looking at Indian tribes as we can't
take care of our own kids that our way
of life is is not acceptable and other
adoptive families would be better and
what's interesting is that the Indian
Child Welfare Act doesn't prevent
non-indian families from adopting
children it just requires a certain
process to make sure that the the
affiliated tribal nation is involved in
that placement and adoption process and
and so that the child can maintain those
those connections or that they tried to
find a family that's more culturally
appropriate for the child so there's
just been actually came out of the
Goldwater Institute which is a Goldwater
when he was a what was he a senator he
actually voted for the Indian child well
for act but today the Goldwater
Institute is is actually funding cases
around the nation to attack the Indian
Child Welfare Act what is the what is
the reason behind it I mean what are
they trying to achieve they say it's not
in the best interest of Indian children
and even though there are child welfare
organizations around the country that
say the Indian Child Welfare Act is
actually the gold standard in child
welfare and that we should be utilizing
those principles that are used in the
Indian Child Welfare Act to protect all
all children to maintain familial
connections when I'm asking this in
terms of fuck if you had a magic wand
what do you do the reason why I'm asking
you this is because I've thought about
it
I've sat down and tried to go over it
myself and I don't see a solution that's
it's what's so strange to me is that we
have nations inside of our nation mm-hmm
and I don't I don't want to end it and I
don't want to continue it neither
neither one makes sense to me
like to to end it would be to say you're
forced to assimilate you no longer have
sovereignty we're gonna break the last
treaty and disband the reservations and
make everybody just be in the United
States citizen that seems crazy well
everyone is a US citizen
so citizenship was forced on us in 1924
I believe but I mean this isn't like I'm
a US citizen where I can't start my own
casino and I can't just do whatever I
want do you understand what why that is
I mean I guess we know I do know I mean
do you know the reason why I'm saying it
this way is because I'm just I'm just
trying to look at it like from an
overhead view like if I was an alien and
I was trying to sort this out I had no
no ties to either culture I'd be like
what do you do with that like what do
you do with that like I understand these
people have been massively fucked over
that the genocide was perpetrated on
their their their race that they were
wiped out both with disease and by
military actions and soldiers and
treaties were broken I get it but the
state they're in right now when you look
at what we're talking about with these
reservations the horrific conditions and
the problems with drug abuse and
alcoholism and suicide
and despair and self-esteem and all
these issues like what is the solution
what would be mean if there was an
unlimited budget like what what would
you do if you were like if it's
president Shannon if you got elected you
could win right you could be President
anybody was president I think so
right so you won and you became the
president and you you ran on the part of
what your platform was was fixing this
gigantic soar that we have in this
country our relationship with the tribes
what would you do unlimited resources
you do whatever you want well it I don't
know if it has anything to do with the
tribes I think it has more to do with
the general public
okay well it's about changing
perspective I think I think if we're
properly educated about about history I
think if we really understand who Native
people are and and their importance here
and their importance to continue as
sovereign tribal nations and it has to
start it has to start with with public
education we have to recreate what's
important to us here and and I think
Indian nations have have been here I
think they're a symbol of amazing
prosperity that the country could have
and we've just never tapped into it
and I'm talking about just principles
and values that that we don't seem to to
hold anymore in this country
appreciation of nature our symbiotic
relationship with it
I feel like you're kind of being
sarcastic no no no no no no no no no no
not at all I think that's one of the
major problems we have in this country
is we don't have a appreciation of
nature we really don't you know and it's
not just an appreciation of it I think
it's a connection to us we can't survive
without it
and and we're so interrelated to
everything that happens on this earth
and and we we don't look seven
generations ahead of us to see what our
decisions today are going to do to us in
the future we're constantly looking for
the dollar today and how that's gonna
reward our efforts today and we're not
looking how you know what the lives of
our children are gonna look like with
the lives of our
great-great-grandchildren are going to
look like and and I think those are the
kind of values that that we need in our
country now and I think that's what's
being debated in the Democratic campaign
right now you know where are our values
are we going to you know continue to
support corporate society and and
corporate sponsored everything or are we
going to start looking at at what we
want you know a hundred years from now
well that's certainly what's going on
right now with the devil you know
debates yeah yeah and it seems like
corporates winning even though their
spokesperson could barely talk which is
hilarious I mean it just shows you how
strong money and media and the influence
of the DNC is what would all this
education do though and explaining to
people to the American citizens that are
outside the tribe's
how is that going to help the tribes
themselves what what could be done to
help these problems that we've already
detailed the problems with alcoholism
the problems with suicide and despair
and self-esteem all these horrific
conditions that exist on many many
tribes well part of that is is is not
anyone anyone's problem about ours that
we have to deal with is as sovereign
nations within our our own communities
and how we how we choose to fix those
issues but I think looking outside how
how we can really affect change is
there's something called prior and
informed consent and it's in its
contained within the UN declaration of
and did
as peoples and it it requires a state or
a government to include tribal nations
in the decision-making processes that
affect them so this general this
administration has been horrible at it
absolutely horrible at it the Obama
administration was much better but we
need to be part we need to be the
decision-makers in the things that
affect us so if if you are going to
bulldoze and blow up our sacred sites to
build your border wall it seems like the
proper thing to do first would be to
have a conversation with us and for us
to to make a decision about how we may
can do that a little bit better to
protect those sacred sites and and
natural springs and other things along
along the border instead of just blowing
up everything where was the situation
that was happening during the Obama the
Obama administration where they were
trying to put a pipeline through and
they were hosing people down and it was
on private land and they were going
through private land and people were
protesting it but they were they were
forcing it through anyway where was that
that was standing Arak right and in
North Dakota and that's still going on
today in fact I think this week there's
a hearing that well it Fort Laramie
Treaty I think is is affected by that so
there are some land right issues there
but we're talking about burials and
sacred areas
not to mention water quality and the
tribes Obama stopped it but as soon as
Trump got into office he he he he pushed
it forward
and and did not consult with tribes and
it's been a fight ever since same thing
happened when Obama was going through it
initially and then they put a stop to it
right before he left office right right
right yeah I just I'm so cynical I
wonder how much of that is horseshit how
much they would have stopped it yeah
you know and just let you know it's
going through don't worry boys well you
know the Obama administration was
probably one of the more favorable
administration's to Indian country there
were many presidents that had never even
gone to a reservation like the majority
of presidents he did and he did actually
he was adopted into the crow nation I
think so he he's an adopted tribal
member that's pretty cool do you think
he's visited since then I don't know but
that's but but that that administration
really did a lot of work in Indian
country that had never been done before
and they actually were looking to tribes
and building a government-to-government
relationship that no one had ever really
done as well every year they would hold
a big tribal consultation in DC where
tribal leaders would come from
everywhere and consult with Obama and
his administration it was really
unprecedented and it was it was a really
happy tunnel I mean as soon as Trump got
into office the doors closed
the doors closed so even though he
appointed assistant secretary for Indian
Affairs Tara Sweeney who's Alaska native
that administration and the Department
of Interior and under the president has
just been so closed it's been hard to
get anything done or to get heard or
even actually have that
government-to-government relationship
anymore we've been left out of a lot of
the decision-making process that's going
on all over Indian country well that's a
it's a very good thing to hear about
Obama that he did that it's sad to hear
the the Trump administration is
abandoned that but it's nice to hear
that someone was making an attempt to do
that so what I'm getting is that the do
really is know
no long-term solution there's no
solution you're saying that the tribes
got a lot of solutions I think there's a
lot of solutions and a lot of moving
parts and I think I think you know
Indian nations need to determine for
themselves how best to handle the
problems within their communities but
outward-facing
to have a strong
government-to-government relationship
that takes into account not just takes
into account but actually requires the
prior and informed consent of those
tribal nations before affecting their
rights or or at least some diplomacy or
negotiation with varying interests
before decisions are made I think that's
that's the heart of what needs to happen
outward-facing and also we need to take
a new look at at our curriculum in
schools we really need to most of our
curriculum our curriculum and in public
schools is about looking at Native
American pre pre 1900 so and not
carrying that into today and who
contemporary Native American tribes are
and what they're doing to help their
people and and what's so wonderful about
Indian country today is that though
there have there are some places that
are still there are some anti Indian
hate groups out there that fight tooth
and nail against anything a tribe and in
their area tries to do to develop
economically there are other communities
where tribes have been able to bring in
economic development whether that's
through gaming or otherwise and by the
way Indian Gaming is like no other type
of corporate gaming and I think a lot of
people don't understand this so if
you're a gambler go to Indian casinos
because that money goes towards Indian
nation governance it's not like a
private business it is legislated that
that money from those casino
go back into Indian nation governance
and are used for jobs and employment and
Social Services and all of that relieves
the state and other government agencies
from from having that that
responsibility so are those the success
stories of modern those are the success
stories I mean if you look at so
Oklahoma the state Oklahoma is fighting
Indian nations and in Oklahoma about
gaming trying to get more money out of
gaming but the that Oklahoma tribes have
brought in tons of money a hundred
thousand jobs have been created and in
casino and other economic development
and why the governor is finite a
governance
governor stit I think is his name and
he's trying to rid Goshen renegotiate
gaming compacts in order to bring more
money into the state so essentially
trying to tax that for state purposes
even though it's on native land right
right
interesting so it's almost in a way
another attempt at violating a treaty
absolutely
so denying the sovereign nation right
well in the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act
which was passed and there's so much
federal legislation it's insane of
federal Indian law I mean it has its own
25 USC this huge code of stuff man but
the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act was
passed because Indians were finding
success doing gaming in states were
getting pissed off because they were
doing it without any interference which
is their inherent sovereignty to do so
so this so this this Act came which was
kind of a compromise where where tribes
can do what's called class to gaming
which is based on bingo and and there's
electronic bingo game
that are kind of like slot machines so
tribes can do class to gaming without
any interference with the state but if
they do class 3 gaming that's card games
and other types then the state they have
to work with the state in order to
develop some kind of compact and revenue
sharing for class 3 gaming so the state
the federal government again allowed
state to interfere with that inherent
tribal sovereignty to regulate their own
economic development yeah that's an
issue with all of these Native American
casinos isn't it they don't get the full
Vegas treatment they can't have all the
games that Vegas can have they can
that's the class three gaming but they
have to do it through the state services
through their sovereign government it's
so strange right it's like four in one
under one hand they get no help at all
and then when something comes along that
allows them to economically thrive then
the government's like hold on where's
our piece so why do you think this is so
so as it can and and so much legislation
looks at tribes as if they're inferior
so back again to those watershed cases
of justice Marshall yeah they're
inferior even being able to assert
jurisdiction over non-indians who come
into our territory and do something
wrong we can't right so if someone
breaks the law in a Native American
reservation there under those federal
government's guidelines or the state
governments laws the tribe does not have
criminal jurisdiction over non-indians
so if someone comes in and Rob's a
casino mm-hmm then the state has to take
care of it right state or the federal
government depending on what type of
crime ideally would it be that the
Native Americans would take care of it
yeah
why not yeah be funny if they brought
back like hanging capital punishment she
lets just hang people in the streets you
see how that works look no more
robberies do you think that's what we
did know back in the day no no I'm just
saying imagine if they just came up with
their own rules right like you know
arbitrarily like out completely out
of the state's laws and the federal
government's laws I don't think that's
what I'm saying I'm just saying would it
be crazy if they just you know went like
let's pretend as their own country we do
whatever we want we're gonna hang people
mm-hmm
saying it would be pretty it is strange
that there's this there's this push and
pull here right there's their sovereign
they can do what they want they have
these casinos but hold on hold on hold
on with this dealing with you want now
you're under the guidelines of the
federal government and the state
government and now we want a piece we
want a little bit of this and
regulations and this and that it is it's
essentially not accepting the fact that
they're sovereign right it's a fake
acceptance it's like yeah yeah you're
you're on your own until you start doing
really well and then it's like hold on
there now you're not on your own yeah
it's this really weird triangle of power
state federal and tribal yeah
jurisdiction and it's completely
confusing when I was a student I was in
fellow with a program called Udall
fellowship that was named after Stewart
Udall who's he he was very strong and
environmentalist who did a lot of work
to protect Indian lands in the
environment and so in his name there was
a fellowship created and it's funded
through congressional appropriations
every year and so now you're making me
forget my story here I'm sorry so when I
was a an intern back in the day and I
was in the Clinton White House that's a
whole another story I've completely lost
I completely lost my story I'm sorry no
worries I need more tumeric coffee we
could build it back so what we were
talking about was the federal government
not allowing the Native American
to have real sovereignty over over their
land and then we went from there to you
having a story that I interrupted by
trying I went that guy's name was damned
or what he did what was him
Stewart Udall what did he do again he he
was a senator a congressman and he did a
lot of good things for Indians that's it
it's gone it's forever gone no were
sucked into my brain somewhere so what
when you look at that situation the
casino situation where now all of a
sudden
economically these tribes can thrive and
the the reservation that owns that
casino can thrive and as you're saying
the money goes straight back to the
reservation and to the people that run
it and and it it legitimate ly helps the
people that live on that reservation
correct absolutely
what other things like that can be done
to also take advantage of the fact that
there are sovereign nation and allow
them to economically thrive without
things like fracking and shit that's bad
for the environment are there other
things that are being implemented that
could also help oh yeah absolutely
there are all different types of
economic development going on in Indian
country that can be very successful for
external businesses too because there
are certain benefits that an outside
business would get if they did for
example manufacturing within Indian
country they could benefit from certain
tax exemptions and and and and rebates
that they wouldn't get in in a state so
if if if corporations would would go
into Indian country instead of you know
going across the board or going
somewhere else there would be great
opportunities but and some tribes are
taking advantage of those business
opportunities not just game
but out of gaming has grown a lot of a
lot of investment a lot of
entrepreneurial ship in tribes and a lot
of the money has gone back to help
educate and teach language and bring
items back that are religious items and
in ancestors and and the things that are
important for that tribal nation so
there's many different ways of
investment that that tribal nations look
at it it's not necessarily economic but
it's about healing their people and and
helping us survive and live better than
we have in the past so investment takes
many forms in Indian country are there
any good documentaries that can educate
people on the the reality of what
happened to the Native American tribes
because it seems like it's one of the
best ways for people to absorb
information and get people excited about
things because it kind of entertained
them as well as it educates them is
there anything that you can recommend so
much has been produced I think you know
PBS has put on some really good I mean
if you look at at PBS even now there are
some great stories that are being told
yeah no no it seems like something that
someone should do right but it's got to
be done in Indian country and it's got
to be done with Indian country because
so much has been done without us yes and
without our even input right so much
research and kind of one-sided
storytelling that that just doesn't make
sense it doesn't have the cultural
competency it doesn't have the real-life
lived experience in the flavor I guess
for lack of a better word to tell these
stories properly ideally when you look
at the future of Native
contrives in the united states and again
as you said you know Native Americans
that are in these reservations are
United States citizens mm-hmm but it's
it's such an unusual situation that
really we only have a comparison to
Canada with their first nations mm-hmm
what what do you think happens in the
future when you we go from 1900 you were
talking about the the the the pass of
1900 to today it's a abysmal 120 years
other than the economic success of the
casinos what do you what do you
anticipate happening in the next hundred
years it's it's hard to tell I know a
lot of tribes have been diversifying
their economic development without our
culture's we won't survive
in fact many elders and you may have
read it in Black Elk speaks that that
we're no longer who we are without our
culture without our languages and likely
will no longer be recognized by the
federal government unless we are Indian
enough you know so those things are
really important to who we are in the
next hundred years and I think it's it's
those things that we will be rebuilding
over the next hundred years healing from
the last and and moving forward with a
newfound understanding of who we are and
a stronger identity and self what that
actually looks like and what's important
I think that we are so still so
dependent on the great white father and
what happens with the u.s. politics and
whether we have a voice there or not
we've got great organizations that help
advocate for Indian country in general
there's a National Congress of American
Indians which has been around for about
75 years and it helps lobby and educate
Congress and keeps tribes informed about
what's going on
in politics and advocate for many of
those interests there are groups like
ours that are advocating for more
cultural revitalization and
strengthening identity and protecting
our youth so I think part of what we're
we're we've been building is is really a
coalition of organizations and tribes to
strengthen who we are and kind of
correct the misfortunes of our history I
know we we still have tribal nations out
there that are living with egregious
poverty and and and issues that still
seem so far away from being corrected
but you know like my grandma always said
where there's hope where there's life
there's hope so
I I think we just continue to I mean
we've frickin survived for this long and
this coronavirus isn't going to take us
out either
I mean we're gonna continue to push
forward and and and try to have a better
future for our kids just like anybody
else just like anybody else
and I think that's that's what's
important is that we're not we're not on
the stage with everyone else we're not
at the table where decisions are being
we're not in the room where it happens
that Native Americans are not being
treated with the same respect as other
people from other countries so like the
culture of Mexico or the culture of
Guatemala or hell they're not in they're
not being treated well but we respect
them as a culture like they're they're
thought of as I mean we're not invading
Mexico you know I'm saying I mean
whether whether you're not you really
literally border walls and we're not
looking at them as something in fear
we're looking at them as another country
mm-hmm we don't look at Native Americans
the same way we look at any week and
maybe it's because you are also United
States citizens
they don't look at them the same way we
have the same like the respect for
people that live in a sovereign nation
another sovereign nation even though
this is a sovereign nation inside of our
nation it doesn't I think you would
agree doesn't get the same respect that
other sovereign nations oh absolutely
is there a great record like a written
record of all of the origin stories like
you were talking to me about and all of
the various languages I mean is all this
documented to make sure that we don't
lose this some better than others and a
lot of that is done there's no big text
that I can I can give you and share with
you that here's all all what you ever
needed to know about Indians that
doesn't exist I think probably should oh
no no I think that's up to the the
Tribal Nation to decide whether they
want to share that and and and and how
to best educate people about who they
are and that's what you know so many
other people have told our stories and
have taken down those histories and all
those people are telling the stories
from a Western perspective and none from
not having the cultural competent copied
competency and having lived and
implemented that way of life so it's
really dependent on on the tribes to
determine for themselves how they want
to to put that forward there are many
tribes that actually have research
protocols that if you want to do you
want to study you want to research you
have to get authority from the Tribal
Nation to do that and and they have to
have a say in whether it was done
appropriately so again it's back to us
telling our own stories us being part of
our own narratives and us being part of
the decision
making that affects us I respect and
appreciate that 100% what I meant was
inside the tribe is there a documented
version of all these stories and of the
language so that can be passed down I
think the real concern seems to be when
you're talking about these incredibly
impoverished communities there the real
concern is that some of these stories
may be lost or some of these some of the
language may even be lost there I I
think it varies like I said there's 574
federally recognized tribes and 300
other tribal groups let me tell you the
story about the chittim Aceh who are in
Louisiana like just surrounded by
marshes right there in the Gulf of
Mexico
their last language speaker died in the
1940s and even though they had you know
language speakers around them none of
those languages were related to theirs
their language was more closely
connected with people's in in
Mesoamerica so obviously there was a
trade there was a relationship between
who the chittim aceh are and were with
people from mezzo and South America yeah
I mean there's there's amazing histories
and stories out there but but what
happened with their languages is in 80's
and 90's the Smithsonian had all these
wax cylinders of tribal languages and
songs and dances and they started
repatriating those back to different
tribal nations so when the chitta matza
got these wax cylinders they're like oh
we have a responsibility here we have to
do something with this and so they
pulled their community together and
everyone everyone you know got their
grandmas and their auntie's and everyone
to pull together words that they knew
stories that they knew different
cultural practices
and building and and and crafting and
all of those things pulled all that
together with the wax cylinders they got
some money from rosetta stone and Cree
recreated their language that had been
lost and today in their schools and
their tribal Lee run schools they speak
their language those children are
speaking their language from
kindergarten up so an incredible success
story now they were able to do that
because they had gaming revenue to help
support that and and when you go to the
school and when you hear the story about
how that happened it's it's it's
incredible so there are stories like
that among all tribes of how they've
been able to recover from what was lost
and so it's it's a long process to
correct what has happened but there are
warriors all over Indian country and
that's that's what they're doing every
day is is trying to recover what was
lost well that's a great success story
and it's beautiful to hear I I just hope
that that can continue with all the
different stories it's just when you
read books about Native American culture
and you just get sort of the like the
most surface taste of what it must have
been like it seems like there's this
incredibly rich history that could could
be lost in time mm-hmm and that would be
a horrible horrible shame it's right
here in front of us and it's it's here
right now and the fact that someone like
you worked so hard to get this message
out here and to let people know what
what is actually happening and the the
plight of these American Indians and the
tribes and what they're still going
through today and that this is not a
battle that happened in the 1800s this
is a battle that's happening today right
every day every day yeah what what is
currently a major focus for you hmm
well
the repatriation and sacred sites issues
so returning cultural items and
ancestors back to their affiliated
tribes and is there a lot of that out
there so like I said there's that that
law the Native American graves
protection and repatriation act that
requires any institution that received
federal funding or federal agencies to
work towards a repatriation of items
that they've received over time back to
their tribes but there are also tons of
ancestors and items in international
Museum so we're working on developing
strategies to go after those because a
lot of those countries they're there has
been kind of a rethinking about the
purpose of museums and and public
education regarding indigenous peoples
and how do we decolonize these
institutions and so we're trying to work
in some countries are easier than others
because if you have sacred religious
items from American indigenous societies
in some museums across the waters their
country considers it their cultural
property so you need an act of their
country's government in order to dia
session those items and return them home
so there are some countries that are
much more difficult to work with than
others but we're in the process of
developing strategy to help internet
with international repatriation we're
also trying to watch private collectors
and educate people about the importance
of returning cultural patrimony and
other sacred items that they've received
over time whether or not there is a
legal obligation to do there there's
definitely an ethical and moral
obligation to return these items so that
that cultures can be revitalized and
that those items can be put back to use
so that's one one area we have a
repatriation conference every year that
we work together with tribes and
institutions and in foreign governments
to work on these issues sacred sites I
just was before the indigenous peoples
subcommittee in the house a few weeks
ago talking about what's going on at the
border and that Atum chairman was there
as well
to talk about those issues and as he
spoke he was he was telling the Congress
representatives that he just found out
that they were blowing up another
section you know so it's it's and that
is happening because there was a law in
2005 that allowed Department of Homeland
Security to waive all these
environmental laws and if there was an
emergency to do so and so the
administration is is saying that the
border wall is an emergency that allows
them to waive all these environmental
laws and so it's not just about
protecting sacred sites but all the
other environmental concerns all the the
animal migrations birds plants as and
water quality that are being affected by
this border wall because people strongly
think we need a 30 foot you know tall
border so so we're working we continue
to work to protect sacred sites so along
the border what we're we're they're
doing this and putting in the wall many
of these areas have been designated as
sacred sites and so is that what's what
you're saying yeah our known sacred
sites and there's artifacts there and
all sorts of different things that can
be destroyed by the construction age
they blew up an area and found human
remains oh Jesus mm-hmm yeah no do they
stop when they do that they were paid
created those bones and they kept going
yeah so this this is how that's it
that's it that's it they're just moving
forward they don't identify the bones do
you know for the rest of the culture
that might have existed
moving forward and and you know what
they're saying and so and and the
rhetoric around this is so detrimental
because during during that hearing it
was clearly about how do we protect
sacred sites and and how do we make sure
that the tribal consultation and other
options can be presented so that the
environment and other areas are
protected and the Republican congressman
that was there it was really quite seems
like not a nice guy
basically said there is more damage
caused by migrant traffic trash and
defecating then there is by blowing up
the ground and so that is the Department
of the Interior Homeland Security and
and Republicans in Congress are saying
about that border well stop and think
about how that's unchallenged yeah how
ridiculous a thing that is to say you
could pick up trash you can pick up shit
mm-hmm you can't pick up once you blow
up sacred sites yeah it's forever and
it's irreplaceable these are
irreplaceable resources the fact that
nobody challenged him on that like
that's such a ridiculous thing okay we
challenged them and Deb Holland who is
Native American
congresswoman definitely challenged him
about that but you know it's I think the
law is on their side is it safe to say
that there's many areas that you're
talking about along the border that are
probably undiscovered because you're
dealing with things that are potentially
thousands of years old
so remember undiscovered has different
meanings
so tribes may have understandings about
certain areas that other people do not
that they try to protect and so that's
why consultation is so important and
working with tribes so you can
understand what's going on on the ground
but usually they do some kind of minor
investigation and supposedly that was
done
that is being done but nothing's being
done to protect it so it's known but so
even if they consult with the tribes and
the tribe say this is this area is
essentially a burial ground from a
thousand years ago and our ancestors use
this yeah there you go that's cool story
we're gonna put a wall here yep yeah but
that happens that's not just happening
at the border that's happening all over
the United States yeah yeah so and
that's nothing new what's new here is
that all of those environmental laws and
those opportunities for public comments
so it's not just tribal consultation but
even public comment have been completely
waived those stories always weird me out
when someone's building an apartment
building and they stop construction
because they found some sort of a burial
site underneath and you're like right
like how many of those are out there I
mean how many how many areas where
people are digging into the ground they
are gonna find some incredible
archaeological discovery and it's it's
getting you know smashed by a bulldozer
yeah it happens all the time and so a
lot of our a lot of the context for what
was happening here before Europeans came
is gone yeah because we've just
destroyed all the evidence of it hmm
you know so that's why often the way
archaeological investigations have have
moved forward as they look at discrete
sites without connecting the dots in a
more holistic way about what's happened
in a certain area so all most of our
archaeological context and all that
evidence is gone and it continues to be
looted by amateur archaeologists and of
course you know I've worked on many
different developments across the
country where you know the bulldozers
come oh they see there's human remains
there and they just dump it into the
fill really yeah because they don't want
to stop the report
money is stuff yeah across the shell on
them yeah it's amazing to me that
there's some sites that you could just
visit like Buffalo jumps where they ran
by flows off the cliff like a friend of
mine was telling me about this is a site
that you could go to and I'm like you
could just go there he's like yeah you
find Indian points there I'm like really
you find arrow points so you find laying
around what should be these priceless
archaeological record of Native
Americans and you just pick them up yeah
just go to any little little town across
the country and you'll see a little
antique shop somewhere and and you go
look on their walls and there's gonna be
archaeological evidence there without
any context without any understanding of
where it came from whether it's pieces
of funerary object arrowheads or what
have you
Arrowhead was unbelievably calm oh yeah
I found one I found one in Nevada I was
on a hunt and we were in the mountains I
found this little tiny chip you weren't
on federal land were you I don't know
what land we're on it's it's public land
it was a public land hunt it was a draw
a tag for it but we found this old and
it was crazy to look at you know I'm
looking at this little tiny piece it was
like a white I don't know what type of
rock it was made out of but it just it
was stunning like to hold that and to
think like this this was someone's
weapon that they were using to hunt with
who knows how long ago who knows how
many hundreds of years ago I just
stumbled upon it and I think that's why
we're so fascinated Americans are so
fascinated with Indians is because
they're all around us I mean yeah you
know we're standing and that's one thing
I forgot to do when we started this
interview is to recognize the land where
we're standing now which is original
land at the 2mass and Tongva people
right here we're still here today yes
right here Allen yes yes
these are indigenous lands everywhere
where we stand are indigenous lands and
what's interesting is that we don't
recognize that here there are other
countries like for example in Australia
they have any kind of public event or
governmental gathering or what
and they they recognize who were there
before them you know there's an
acknowledgement there's a recognition
we've forgotten all that history we've
forgotten what was here before even
though the people are down the street
the two masses is is north of here the
Tongva or south those people still exist
and did they have a reservation out here
so Tongva are not federally recognized
300 right right and in in California I
think there's a hundred and four
federally recognized tribes in
California California history and I'm
you're aware of the mission system right
and in in California the mission system
mean religious missions
yeah the Spanish missions that were
built up the coast in California and and
the effect that those missions had on
the indigenous peoples that were here I
know about the effort to convert them to
Kazakh Catholicism there was a huge
issue at the turn of the 20th century
right right and and there are you know
mass grave sites at every one of those
missions of indigenous peoples you know
thousands of indigenous peoples died you
know building those missions and and
from disease and and otherwise I mean I
mean think about it if there are some
teachers and professors that that do
different kind of work with their
students and and there's this one kind
of exercise of giving everyone in the
class a role that you have in your
society you know so whether you're you
know tending agriculture or you're
making clothes or you're protecting the
children or you're getting food or
whatever it is and then ninety-six
percent of you are gone what do you do I
mean can you imagine what's so
our ancestors must have lived through
and and I know for myself personally
what's driven me and my life as my
grandmother telling me those stories of
what she and her family had to go
through to be here and and saying we did
that we went through all that so you
could be here and you could do something
better for us I mean that's what drives
us all is is the pain that our ancestors
went through and trying to make a life
for ourselves that are better hey we
want to we want a piece of that manifest
destiny - and we want it back right you
know so these issues you know we should
take you to Indian country so - that I
would love that where should I go um oh
heck where do you want to go
so I I think it would be important if
you or anyone else would be interested
you know most tribal nations have web
sites where you can learn about who they
are what their history is and different
policies and things that are important
to them I think it would be important to
go to a more affluent tribe and also to
go to a tribe that maybe doesn't have
that same level of Economic Development
and you can find that anywhere you can
find that here in California and Nevada
in Washington State and in New York
there are many places we could go you
tell me and I'll tell you where you can
go well let's work something out I would
really like to do that I have my friend
cam Haines went to an Apache reservation
in Arizona I believe last year and he
said that there is actually a cave that
they wind up putting bars on to keep
people from stealing the artifacts but
there's arrows in there and human
remains yeah and they've left them in
there I mean just something like that is
unbelievably fascinating that this
exists
and it just exists on this reservation
is sitting there and that but most
people are not even aware of this is
like an unbelievably sacred part of
history that's right there right right
and in those places are constantly being
looted there was a time in American
history 50s 60s 70s where you could get
these beautiful cross country maps right
and many of those maps would have places
where there were Indian artifacts and
places that you could go and and and and
and get stuff so so a lot of things like
that have been published throughout time
and so folks that are interested in
doing that and make their living doing
that you know they rely on those those
old documents and and stories of where
things are and and are still looting and
and selling those items today I think we
in the West have this idea that if
something is historic we should be able
to look at it you know we should be able
to go to a place the Smithsonian or the
this sort of a tour and go see it mm-hmm
I think what you're saying is we have to
kind of relook at that and that it's not
ours to look at and that this is a part
of the tribes in the part of your
culture mm-hmm and this is not something
you could just gawk at even I mean I
never even thought about looking at
bones that looking at bones would be
disrespectful until I thought about like
Amy Winehouse is head sitting there at a
museum and I'm like yeah every kind of
fucked up yeah yeah yeah that's it is a
it's a it requires a shift in
perspective right and I think that's all
tribal nations are asking people to do
is to think differently about these
issues and and recreate a new and more
appropriate myth about our collective
history and let us decide for ourselves
what we want to share and what we don't
want to share
and I think what you'll find is is as
that Indian nations have shared a lot so
this this work on Native American graves
protection and repatriation act where
those museums thought they were gonna
lose all their collections and their
shelves would be cleaned out and no
exhibits anymore what they found instead
was that they actually figured out what
the hell they've been holding on to this
whole time because now they're actually
talking to the people who who have
experience expertise and cultural
knowledge about these items that are in
their collections so all of a sudden
information that they never had before
and so the relationships that have been
built between museums and those
institutions and tribal nations has has
built something completely different
than nobody had contemplated before just
from talking to Native people and in
understanding what those things are and
where they come from and what should be
shared in and what shouldn't be there's
still a lot of museums holding out
though and usually those are the big
well-funded institutions what is their
what's their argument they don't have an
argument what's interesting is is I
wrote somewhere once that you know we're
just waiting for a lot of old white
people to die I mean that's that yeah
that's really the case that there's just
this old perspective this old philosophy
this hoarding philosophy not wanting to
give things back is also in their
defense could it be that they're really
concerned that that stuff would be lost
and that it is yeah important historical
right and so the the mission of many
museums is to educate the public and
there is this kind of arrogant what I
would consider an arrogant way of
thinking about about the world like
everyone should have access to knowledge
and and and tribes don't necessarily
feel that same way
so there is that kind of that philosophy
and so those institutions will often use
the law to work against the repatriation
situation and delay mostly delay most
tribes that want to fight against
institutions like that because for one
thing they don't have the capacity to
fight that because there are so many
things on their table already and and
another reason to bring that kind of
discord around these sacred items or
around ancestral remains is is difficult
so you don't want to bring you know that
energy around something that you need to
care for and respect and and put back in
the ground so you know there's a lot of
reasons why these bigger institutions
are getting away with not following the
law and they take advantage of it and so
that's why my my organization is
important because we try to help bridge
that it seems like some sort of
cooperative effort could be reached
where the things that the tribes would
like people to see and would like to
educate people on could be displayed and
maybe some sort of a National Museum of
Native American history really that is
an awesome idea so there's this exist
it's called the National Museum of the
American Indian where is it um in
Washington DC it's also yes it's also in
and it's it's got a I'm coming up with
ideas that are really pretty it's got a
pretty screwed up story though of how
the National Museum of the American
Indian got started but I also want to
mention before I forget there's
wonderful tribal museums so there are
tribes out there that have their own
Museum in archives or Tulalip in
Washington
Washington State Washington state where
Zetas that Tulalip it's outside of
Seattle okay
bulb Cultural Center a Saginaw Chippewa
tribe in Michigan I hope I always get my
M States wrong in in Michigan they have
the zippering center of honest Tanabe
life ways and cultures amazing Museum I
think they're there they're one of my
favorite Choctaw Nation my nation in
Oklahoma are building a new cultural
center and museum
so those are probably that's in outside
of Durant is there a timeline on that
when they believe that's good very soon
very some in Oklahoma and a couple
months supposedly yeah well yeah if you
can travel doesn't it yeah yeah I'll
tell you exactly what I'm supposed to be
there I'm doing gigs in Oklahoma I'm
supposed to be there I think sometime in
July do you know where in Oklahoma I'll
tell you what I know you know I'm at
September so you don't even know what
month it is timbi twelve okay
Tulsa right yeah September yeah
September 11th I'm in Lincoln Nebraska
and then September 12th I'm in Tulsa
Oklahoma yeah so Tulsa is up north I
know talked ah that's southeastern
Oklahoma so it's a bit away what is the
name of that place
the BOK Center is that what it is in
Tulsa
well I think it'd be done by then oh
yeah if not the Chickasaw Nation has an
amazing cultural center so that's in
Sulphur Oklahoma I believe they've got a
great museum there and and really that's
a that's a great nation to talk to I
often considered affecting to be
Chickasaws really can you do it I don't
have to be adopted in I think the
Chickasaw are kind of like our little
brothers but they have see our nation's
were heavily affected by Christianity
and so the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma is
very proud of the fact that
it's been able to maintain its languages
through Christian hymnals in singing
Christian music so so my nation really
is is Christian but there are many other
nations in Oklahoma that I've spent more
time with than my own and that's
Chickasaw and Ann Creek and Seminole
nations that are also in Oklahoma that
still maintain their stomp dances and
other traditional pagan rituals so I
tend to favor those yes yeah makes sense
yeah it's it really is an amazing story
and a sad story but a fantastic story as
well the story of the Native American
culture and life in this country and
what it's become and I don't think it's
told enough I don't think I don't think
I mean I think I'm you know I've barely
scratched the surface of it you did I
mean I could keep you here all day I'm
sure and it's been it's been a very
interesting dialogue because part of
this is trying to figure out what is it
that you want to know and you think that
your listeners want to know about this
because the last thing I want to do is
is to offend your listeners because I
really want everyone to come away with
learning about Native American history
and what's going on in Indian country
not offended and not with any kind of
distaste because I think this is our
history that we share together and I
think the only way we're going to change
things is if we change you know the
general public and how the general
public sees sees Indian company I don't
think you have to worry at all about a
fan I don't think you offended anybody
and you know I've been being nice well
listen my answer bring me back and I'll
be offensive I would love you to my
answers is of my ancestors I'm
third-generation so
my ancestors have nothing to do with any
of this we came over from Europe we
don't know anything like what the fuck
was going on here before we got here you
know my ancestors all Italian and Irish
right and they had to give up a lot of
their culture yes when I came into this
most of it yeah yeah yeah I remember
talking it's it's interesting too
because so much has changed I remember
when I was a boy talking to my
grandfather my grandfather would talk to
me about what it was like to immigrate
here from Italy and how horribly they
were treated and the racism against
Italians was just so prevalent in common
and and horrific the things that he
would tell me were terrible and I've
never experienced racism against
Italians it doesn't exist anymore and in
just the three generations Treeing my
grandparents my parents and me it's gone
it's essentially this being an Italian
is country I mean there's some people
that have prejudice about all sorts of
different cultures but that's just rare
it's weird you know
whereas Mexican prejudice is super
common right prejudice against Mexicans
dealing with this all this wall bullshit
and what's going on between those are
indigenous people sure yeah well not
only that they own fucking California
not go to the 1800s right I mean that's
part of Sun in the morning star some
part of that book is talking about
Mexicans and US troops fighting over
California that's a big part of it does
that ignore Native American no I mean it
kind of does but I mean it's look in
some ways Mexicans are Native Americans
right the Mexicans they absolutely yeah
so and not only that I'm sure they share
a lot of DNA I mean there's a lot of
Mexicans and I'm friends with it look
like they could be you know a complete
Native American yeah where do you think
man is right Spaniards came and met with
Mexicans the original Mexicans and
introduced their life they weren't
Mexicans they were indigenous people
right exact and and just like you know
West fainted
everyone um you know they they sent
there they actually trained dogs to rip
people apart they I mean that maybe I'm
getting off off the subject now but you
know Catholicism came over here and they
had this thing called a papal bull and
it was basically the Catholic law and so
these Spaniards would hammer the papal
bull into a tree and speak in Spanish to
the indigenous indigenous world saying
if you don't convert we will slaughter
you right that's what you're a heathen
you must convert or you know we're gonna
kill you
and of course nobody knew what the hell
they were saying because they didn't
speak Spanish and they would SiC these
dogs on them I mean there's there's
these horrendous stories that are told
by the missionaries that were there with
the Spanish you know to bring their
their salvation and it's just horrendous
some of them the accounts of this and
that's just and recent that's well that
was 1500s but no it seems like it is
it's five lifetimes five human beings
living to a hundred five five lives ago
people were doing that but we still
carry this with us I mean these stories
are still a part of the narrative that
we told and and and I guess we're still
telling them telling it because people
haven't listened or they're still these
stories haven't been taught yeah it's
they haven't been taught there's almost
too much to teach and it's very
convenient since you know we air quotes
are the victors so we kind of can
rewrite history
or at least at least make that part of
history not important you know had a bit
that I did in my act
about presidents about electing
presidents and I was like you just gotta
realize the United States was founded in
1776 and that people live to be a
hundred and that's three people ago like
we
we just got here we just got here and
now in the course of three people's
lives
we have skyscrapers and planes and
pollution and we're sucking all the fish
out of the ocean and we've wiped out
most of the history of the indigenous
people mm-hmm and it's it's it's crazy I
mean it really is a very strange fact
that is so often overlooked if the on a
day-to-day basis how often do we discuss
Native American history how often do we
discussed the the the battles that took
place the lives that were lost the
people that died from disease the Trail
of Tears how often is that discussed in
this country I think there's five or six
million of us that talk about it every
day but that's you know that's that's in
yeah so we're keeping that alive and and
like I said there's a lot of there's not
many of us comparatively but we're out
there and we're all doing double-time to
work to push this out into the public
narrative and it's been really really
hard well I really appreciate your
efforts and I really appreciate you
humoring me and coming here and and and
teaching us and educating me about
what's you know how you feel about
things and and the stories that you came
here to tell and I think what you're
doing is very very important I'm very
happy that you're out there I'm happy
that you took the time in this calamity
and chaos and pandemic to to risk your
health and come and make this trip yeah
I'm gonna be isolated when I get home my
families put me in the basement for two
weeks Jamie doesn't have the cooties he
told me he's fine
and I'm clean as a whistle so you're
good I eat healthy is there anything
else we could talk about before you
leave we can talk about tons of stuff
but I think what I need to tell you is
that the Association on American Indian
Affairs has been around for a long time
and we are rebuilding our capacity to
look into the next hundred years of how
we want to move forward I would love to
have input from your listeners about
what they think they need in it or
their questions are about Indian country
about an email no I'm not it'll be fun
we have it we have a verbal we have a
website Oh God
only good enlightened people can watch
out but that's a wonderful thing there's
so much we can do together and people
who are interested in getting to know
more about what's going on in Indian
country or getting involved and helping
out it's unbelievable where they can go
Indian - Affairs dot org Indian -
Affairs or okay
we will send people to there and thank
you so much Shannon thank you very much
for being here I really appreciate it
bye everybody
stay safe or not or stay happy do what
you guys do
[Music]